---
layout: post
title: "Higher Kinded Types Demystified"
permalink: /posts/HKT/
---

The concept of higher-kinded types is coming up more often these days, both because functional languages (where they're more relevant) are on the rise in terms of popularity, and because it's currently the source of a few hotly-debated issues, like whether Rust will ever "get" them. The concept in itself isn't a complicated one, despite the name being off-putting (higher _kinded_?), and understanding it is a great step in beginning to figure out some of the type-level programming that's so popular in languages like Haskell and Scala. Abstraction city, here we come!

## First, Functions

It's a bit easier to understand higher kinded types if we first talk about a very similar concept in a different universe, that might be more familiar: higher order functions. For those of us who are a few years out from an undergrad CS curriculum, a function is called "higher order" when it either takes in a function as a parameter or puts out a function as a return type. We can work our way up to higher order functions with a few examples:

- **Order 0** -- `def seven(): Int = { return 7 }`
- **Order 1** -- `def square(x: Int): Int = { return x * x }`
- **Order 2** -- `def addSome(some: Int): Fun[Int -> Int] = { ... }`
- **Order 3** -- `def operateSome(op: Operator): Fun[Int -> Fun[Int -> Int]] = { ... }` 

We'll go through each of these one by one. It's clear that as the "order" of the function goes up, the function-nesting of its parameter type (or its return type) goes up too: at order 0, there are no parameters, so we end up with constant functions. And then, at order 1 the parameters are "normal" types, like `Int`, but in a functional context they're really constant functions themselves -- after all, in `square`, we can view `x` as a function that yields the value of `x` every time it's called.

Then, at order 2, things get more interesting, and the return type is actually a non-constant function itself, which is a function that adds the value `some` to an integer that's passed into it. Thus, for example, we could write:

```scala
val addFour: Fun[Int -> Int] = addSome(4)
val result: Int = addFour(3)
print(result)  // prints "7", or so I hope
```

Now, it's important to note that our **Order 2** function here (`addSome`) returns an **Order 1** function, one that operates only on the constant types we talked about before. We could talk about a function that returns a function that returns a function (a second order function), of course -- and we do, with the example of an order 3 function above! But that bumps us up another order, and after that point it starts getting convoluted. The takeaway here is that an order $$n$$ function will take in or return a function of order $$n-1$$, with our base case order 0 being a constant function.

## The Types Themselves

So, it's clear that the order of a function is based on how "nested" its parameter list is, and higher kinded types start to seem a bit less confusing when we realize the exact same thing is true for them. 

### 0th Order

Just like order-0 functions, these are our **concrete** types. They're not parameterized on any other type, and are the most basic, everyday type we work with (and the first ones you're introduced to when beginning a computer science curriculum). `String`, `Int`, and `Boolean` all fit into this category, along with any structs or classes you've defined yourself in most cases -- so, `Professor` and `ServiceOrder` fit in here, too. 

Overall, one can think of a 0th order type as one that is able to "stand on its own", without any help, which contrasts with higher-order types.

### 1st Order

A first-order type is one that is _parameterized_ on a 0th order type, i.e. they take a type parameter just like how we saw a first-order function had a constant-function parameter (or return type). Thus, they're not constant anymore because the type can change based on what type parameter it's given, so they can't be order-0 types anymore; we must have gone up an order.

Just like concrete types, these come up very often in conventional programming, with one of the most common examples being `List`. In most languages, `List` is homogeneous -- each instance of `List` can hold one and only one type of object -- and in fact `List` is parameterized on that type, which is why you'll see `List<Int>` in Java or `[Int]` in Haskell. More examples of first-order types include `Map`, `Option`, and `Set`, and we can write our own first-order classes using polymorphic constructs. It might be useful to think of these as "container types", since in most cases they exist to "hold" instances of another type.

So, we see that there are actually infinitely many ways to make a `List`, based on what's passed in as its type parameter -- just as there are infinitely many outputs of `square` based on what integer is passed in as a value parameter.

### 2nd Order

So, these are the "scary ones", the ones you'll hear referred to as higher-kinded types (HKTs) along with third-order types and above. Just like first-order types (container types) allow us to abstract over base types (write code that works easily no matter what type we store inside a `List`), second-order types allow us to _abstract over containers_. This is the key point to understand about HKTs, and also the point that makes for quite a hurdle -- it's a level of abstraction that we're not used to thinking about. In effect, we'd like to be able to write code that will work on any kind of container type, whether it's a `List`, an `Option`, a `Set`, or one of your own creation. 

So say, for example, that during the course of a Tuesday morning we find the need to write a function `merge` that can take two `List`s and return a list that contains the elements that came from both. Then, we might write:

```scala
def merge[A](x: List[A], y: List[A]): List[A] = {

}
```

## Further Reading

- The folks at Typelevel wrote a [similar article](https://typelevel.org/blog/2016/08/21/hkts-moving-forward.html)