---
layout: post
title: "I Should Learn To Touch Type"
permalink: /posts/touch-typing/
---

Adventures in asking reasonable questions and then becoming a weirdo

## Phase I: Why don't the columns line up

So, I started following guides and practicing how to use all my fingers for typing -- hands on the home row, no looking at the keyboard, and all that.

It was slow going at first, and not just because it was all new to me. The whole process was made arbitrarily more difficult by the fact that the columns don't "line up" like you'd want them to! To take an example, imagine your fingers on the home row of a regular keyboard:

image

Your left index finger generally lives on the F key. Now, quick, you need to type an V! What do you do? Move your left finger down one square and press, right?

...Well, not _quite_. If you just move it straight down and press, you'll end up hitting C half the time, or ending up in the no man's land between keys. That's because the rows on a typical keyboard are _staggered_, so they don't line up in nice columns. A long time ago, this design was implemented in typewriters to [prevent the arms from jamming up]() when the user was typing quickly.

The impact of that decision today means that each time you press a key, you need to keep in mind

1. Which finger in particular will be doing the pressing
1. Whether that finger needs to move up or down

and subconsciously make small adjustments to the left or right accordingly. Not only is this mental overhead inconvenient (and the lateral motion just asking for RSI), but it makes learning to touch type so much harder than it needs to be, before you have comitted the small lateral compensations to muscle memory.

Well, that just doesn't make any sense! We don't need to abide by the restrictions of typewriters anymore. Do they make keyboards that aren't tied to the past?

image

Yes they do! Excellent, let's get [one of those]() and continue our journey into touch typing unhindered.

## Phase II: The backspace button is so far away

Ah shoot, another bump in the road! If the whole point of touch typing is to type faster and more comfortably by keeping your hands attached to a consistent place on the keyboard... why are so many of the keys so dang far from the home row?

Take our example of a regular keyboard again, and imagine your hands placed on the home row like they're supposed to always be. 



## Phase III: I guess the P key is actually pretty far too
