---
layout: post
title: "Reflections on Adulthood"
permalink: /posts/adulting/
---

Throughout my time in college and the first years of my life afterwards, I have been constantly dealing with a sense of frustration when interacting with what I call the "adult world" (the world of taxes, contracts, those medical appointments that you really ought to make but no one will force you, stuff like that). It always felt like everyone knew something I didn't.

In that time, I've learned a couple of things that make it clearer, things that were hard for me personally to learn, and I figured I'd write them down here.

## It's not easy being green

Having little experience with this "adult world", it feels like every week a new situation crops up that smells fishy to me -- but I just have to go with it, because I haven't clocked enough hours on this planet to have a developed sense of when something's actually not right. It would be _nice_ if the default gut-feelings of morality and fairness that we learn at a yound age and all (generally) share could stand in here, for determining when someone's trying to screw you over. But as I figure everyone over the age of 25 has learned the hard way, that's a rule comprised mostly of exceptions.

Take broker's fees. For those living outside of New York City (where I understand this practice is most common), a "broker's fee" is a one-time payment to a real estate agency upon signing a lease, usually amounting to 1-2 months of rent. For example, an apartment renting for $3000 a month will often result in fee of $5000. Considering that the broker (an agent trying to get the aparentment rented) is working on behalf of the _landlord_, and not you, clearly the landlord's responsibility to foot the bill for these services. But, it's the norm in NYC for that to be passed to the tenant instead (in addition to first/last/security). Bullshit? Absolutely, and everyone agrees it is! But to try to find a way to fight it would be time wasted; it's a perfectly legal and accepted way of doing business here, no way around it (for a given apartment at least; some are no-fee).

So, our sense of what's "fair" has failed us here in helping determine when we're being conned. And sadly the same could be said about foo.

To better demonstrate what I'm talking about, here are few examples of things that seem fishy, and actually are, and should be avoided:

- Payday loans ??
- Most high-expense-ratio managed retirement funds

And a few examples of things that seem fishy, but are in fact just common hurdles that every regular adult just needs to take on the chin:

- Insurance not covering something they should
- foo

The point here is that there's no correlation between what "feels fair" and how the adult world really works. From what I can tell, the only way to know when you're _actually_ being screwed over is to learn as much as you can about the specific situation you're dealing with, either by reading about it or talking to people who have experienced it. This often requires a good deal of vigilance and a large time investment.

In the meantime, you're going to be doing a lot of learning the hard way.

## Check your expectations at the door

The second thing that's become abundantly clear over the last few years is that your expectations are _very often the enemy_.

What I mean by this is that I need to try very hard not to rely on anything working out the way I want it to. Whenever I do start to "expect" something, I find myself poorly equipped to handle the case that it falls apart for whatever reason. However, if I can make sure to expect nothing at all, then I don't need to be disappointed and instead can focus on the necessary logistics that tend to need taking-care-of whenever plans fall apart. This seems to be how most adults work, at least, I think?

This essentially means not looking forward to anything -- not that party where you'll see a bunch of friends you haven't met in a while (you'll be sick), not that promotion at your job that you've been eyeing for multiple years (they'll decide to fill the position externally), not that package with those replacement lightbulbs you really need (it'll be stolen off your porch) -- you get the idea.

If it sounds a little depressing, that's because it is! But being an "adult" (at least, as far as this post goes) means being able to handle problems independently, and I've found that I'm much worse at that when I'm feeling angry or disappointed with my failed plans. Or, well -- if there's a way to feel angry or disappointed and keep executive functioning still at 100%, then I haven't figured it out yet, anyway. And (from personal experience) neither I nor the other people around me deserve or always have the capacity to deal with fallout that can result.
