---
layout: post
title: "The Word"
permalink: /posts/the-word/
---

What is the word I’m looking for?

It isn’t “love”, even though that’s the first thing that comes to mind. It gets at the right idea, but it’s too broad, it means too many different things to different people. And besides, it’s also a bit extreme — what I’m talking about doesn’t require something as hard to come by (or grow) as love.

It isn’t “caring” or “empathy” either. They’re ingredients necessary to cook up the word I am trying to come up with, but just ingredients, right, not the whole dish. And it feels to me like these words focus too much on the near-term, moment-to-moment aspects of life anyways — [[kicking a teenage bird out of the nest]] definitely wouldn’t be described as “emphatic”, but it is an example of the word I’m looking for.

“Humanity” is out almost immediately — it tops love in the “means different things to different people” rankings, and rightfully so. History has shown our species to be [[heroic, satanic]], and loads in between, so I’m not sure the word “humanity” means anything at all anymore.

Is it “vulnerability”, or in a similar vein “gentleness”? I think we’re getting closer with these. They start to get at the [[internal feelings/hardships]] of people and how we should navigate them. Still, my word doesn’t mean [[actively showing kindness to people experiencing difficult situations]], it’s just having respect for the fact that people are always experiencing these things, even if you can’t see it.

And, maybe that’s my word then, “respect”? Respect for the other person’s history, for their experiences, for both who they are now and who they’re going to be? Respect for their needs, for the needs of their family, for their intelligence, their sense of dignity, even when it doesn’t make sense or is inconvenient?

[[their quality of life]]

I think that gets at the idea pretty well. But if you think you know what I’m talking about and have a better word, let me know
