---
layout: post
title: "Things I Learned at Datadog"
permalink: /posts/datadog/
---

Last month, I quit my job at [Datadog]() after working there for a little over 3 years.

I learned a lot while I was there -- a lot of how you _should_ do things, and of course a bit about how you should _not_ do things -- and I wanted to take a minute to write some of it down, while it's all still fresh in my mind.

{% include disclaimer.html type="warning" content="
This is all **purely my own opinion**, and only reflects my own experiences in one part of one company. You may have learned something completely opposite through different experiences at a different company  -- perfectly valid too!
" %}

And so, in no particular order:

## Software

* **Developers are most effective when they're familiar with many systems**, not just one or two. This way, they can reason about how a change will affect the entire stack (very important during incidents), and their time can easily be reallocated to different areas of the product to speed up important projects. Don't let this happen to 5% of developers by accident (for example, just the ones who have been around for a long time) -- make it happen with rotational programs, etc!

* **Automation (e.g. continuous deployment) can cause as many problems at it solves**. A human implicitly does a bunch of checks and fail-fasts that you only think to program a computer to do after it causes an outage. Only automate a process when it's obvious to everyone involved that the manual way cannot possibly work anymore -- manual processes can even be quite pleasant if you invest a little in tooling!

* **A fast development cycle is worth foo**. Mechanisms like feature flags and microservices can allow developers to write, test, and safely deploy many discrete changes within a single day, which is not only extremely productive, but also much more fun for everyone involved.

## Projects

* **Take advantage of the recency bias**. There will never be a time you're more motivated to solve a hairy latent problem than "right after it causes an outage". It feels great to get it fixed right then, instead of making a ticket that will sit in a backlog, forever waiting for the next sprint.

* **Prefer projects with small organizational scopes**. If the person who cares about the work and the person doing the work are different people, you're opening the door to a host of communication breakdowns, motivation issues, and differences in vision. Not every project can be done start-to-finish by a single person or team, but the ones that can often finish faster, have better outcomes, and be more gratifying for the people working on it.

* **Check in often, with everybody, about a project's perceived value**. Relatedly -- if no one cares about the work at all, the project is just going to take two years to finish and be a big disappointment in the end anyway. Either there is a lot of value in the project (in which case it's important that everyone working on it sees it and agrees), or there isn't (in which case -- might be time to ask "do we still want to do this").

> What was critical 6 months ago might not be today, for whatever reason, and avoid the sunk-cost fallacy.

* **Don't measure proxies**. Don’t measure number of cores allocated or number of lambda invocations if what you’re trying to decrease is cost. Measure cost! Sometimes proxies are necessary, and in those cases, it's best to spend a lot of time (more than you want to) to make sure the proxy is the least bad it can be, since bad measurements can lead to massive wastes of time.

* **Allowing developer autonomy will make or break a project**. Find smart people, entrust them with a problem (not a solution), and just let them do what they decide they need to do. Will they still generate an RFC or create a kanban board? Maybe -- but they’ll do it because they see it has value in helping them reach the best solution, not because they’re forced to, and the difference in the quality of that RFC or the attention paid to that kanban will be night and day. People over process!

## People

* **Metrics are for software, not people**. Questions like "how are the developers feeling" can't be boiled down into a 30-question survey, as much as the folks at CultureAmp want you to believe they can. Problems of ___ are inherently qualitative, not quantitative, and trying to shoehorn metrics where they don't belong will only lead to frustration for everyone involved.

^^ ADD "surveys at best give you a place you need to dig further"

* **A need for managers is not a good sign**. In some ways, managers act as bandaids -- they shore up deficiencies in prioritization or communication, such that Alice doesn't talk to Bob directly, she talks to her manager, who talks to Bob's manager, who talks to Bob. This is cruft. It's leagues more efficient, and less passive-aggressive, when people can be trusted and empowered to solve their own issues.

^^ doesn't get the point across well at all, first sentence might be OK but terrible example, focus on hiring and allowing self-management. maybe change bold text too

* **Intrinsics play only a small role in human potential**. A "10x developer" in one situation will be an underperformer in another, depending on the type of work being done, the team dynamic, the balance of interrupt vs focused time -- the list goes on. Almost everyone has the potential to do amazing work when they are set up for success.
